DOI: 10.1038/s41565-022-01105-4
Source: supplementary PDF
--------------------------------------------------

(II) Catalyst Preparation 4
(III) Catalyst Characterization 5
(IV) Catalytic Evaluation 7
(V) Assessment of Mass and Heat Transfer Limitations 8
(VI) Transient Mechanistic and Kinetic Analyses 10
(VII) Computational Methods 12
Supplementary Tables 14
Supplementary Figures 25
Supplementary References 54

(I) Platform of Nanostructured Catalysts
To assess potential catalytic descriptors, a well-defined catalyst platform with systematically varied
properties is central. Herein, the metal speciation and host functionalization are the factors of major
interest, as they were previously identified to affect the overall catalytic performance for Au, Pt, and Ru-
based catalysts. Hence, similar sensitivities can be expected for other active metals, including Rh, Ir, and
Pd. To study both variables, we constructed a platform of M/C catalysts containing the six metals (M)
with different nanostructure, varying from single atoms (SA) to nanoparticles (NP) of gradually increasing
size at a fixed metal loading, supported on activated and N-doped carbon (AC, NC, . To this end,
the carbon supports were impregnated with a solution of the metal chloride precursors, followed by
thermal activation at distinct temperatures (T , for details on the sample nomenclature, see
act
Supplementary . By combining currently available state-of-the-art characterization techniques to
analyse metal nuclearity and speciation in powder catalysts, including aberration corrected high-angle
annular dark-field (AC-HAADF) STEM, X-ray diffraction (XRD), XAS, XPS, and DFT the evolution of
the metal site as a function of the choice of metal, the thermal activation temperature, and the
functionalization of the carbon support, was assessed. At T = 473 K, all metals are exclusively present as
act
single atoms, as visualized by STEM analysis , Supplementary Figs. 1, 2) and corroborated by
the absence of respective metal reflections in the XRD patterns (Supplementary . XPS and
extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) fitting results indicate a positively charged metal center
with ca. 2-4 chlorine neighboring atoms and the absence of metal-metal fingerprints in all cases ,
Supplementary Figs. 4-9, Supplementary Tables 2-5). Notably, the partially or fully chlorinated state of
the metals largely impairs their ability to adsorb common probe molecules, such as carbon monoxide, thus
disqualifying probe molecule vibrational spectroscopy as a tool to further characterize the SACs reported
in this work. Despite the common initial speciation patterns (i.e., isolated atoms), an increase in the
thermal activation temperature triggers distinct behaviors for all metals, depending on the choice of carbon
host. On AC, the population of metal chloride single atoms is systematically decreased with rising
temperature due to gradual agglomeration into nanoparticles with small average particle sizes for Pt, Ru,

Rh, and Ir (d = 3-5 nm at T = 1073 K) and larger sizes for Au and Pd (d = 7.1 nm for Au at
p act p
T = 523 K and d = 11.3 nm for Pd at T = 673 K, Supplementary . Based on XPS and EXAFS
act p act
analyses, the nature of the obtained nanoparticles was identified as mainly metallic, in the case of Au, Pt,
and Pd, and oxidic for Ru, Rh, and Ir. Notably, on NC, the former group does not undergo agglomeration
with increasing thermal activation up to 1073 K. Instead, a gradual change in the coordination
environment from predominantly M-Cl single atoms to M-N single atoms occurs (i.e., coordinated to 4
x 4
nitrogen neighboring atoms). On the contrary, the agglomeration behavior of Ru, Rh, and Ir is hardly
affected by the choice of the carbon host and small metal oxide particles are formed with increasing
activation temperature.

To rationalize the transformation of the metal speciation in the M/C catalysts during the catalyst synthesis,
three aspects were considered: (i) the metal cohesive energy, E , indicating the stability of the bulk
coh
metal, (ii) the metal oxide formation energy, E (M-oxide), describing the stability of the metal oxide,
form
and (iii) the single-atom formation energies in their most stable configurations in chlorinated and non-
chlorinated form, E (MCl) and E (SA), quantifying the interaction strength of single atoms to the
form form
surface defects of the carbon (N-defects on NC and O-defects on AC, respectively). Considering the
former two, it is evident that E and E (M-oxide) are linearly dependent . This implies that the
coh form
origin of the diverging behavior of the Au (Au, Pt, Pd) and Ru (Ru, Rh, Ir) groups regarding their
preferred formation of metallic or oxidic nanoparticles relates to their ability to form stable oxides. To
assess the impact of the metal-host interactions in the M/C catalysts, DFT was employed. The model for
the AC and NC supports was constructed from 16 distinct defects containing either N (pyrrolic, pyridinic,
graphitic, oxo-pyridinic) or O (hydroxyl, epoxide, keto) heteroatoms (Supplementary , see
Computational Methods for details) leading to 280 metal-carbon configurations. This thorough speciation
analysis is based on stability of the single atoms, chlorinated single atoms, bulk metals and metal oxides
(that identify thermodynamically stable configurations, Supplementary -15) coupled to matching
the experimental characterization fingerprints, EXAFS (narrowing further the set of most likely models,
Supplementary . Considering this extensive number of sites offering diverse coordination motifs,

the interactions of a single-metal atom (MCl species) vary widely depending on the specific AC or NC
defect , Supplementary . Remarkably, also the extent of this interaction, as averaged
(arithmetic mean) formation energies of the non-chlorinated single atom M-SA and chlorinated
MCl species, correlates with the metal oxide phase. Overall, this observation indicates a (linear)
dependence between the metal, metal oxide, and metal SA (MCl) stability. Thereby, the metal oxide
formation energy plays the key role in directing the speciation behavior. For example, on a representative
bi-epoxidic AC defect, the stability of the SA species (with reference to the metal bulk) is sufficient to
overcome the cohesive energy of all metals, if Cl is present in the coordination sphere (T = 473 K).
act
Upon increasing the activation temperature, the Cl content decreases, leading to the formation of less
stable Cl-undercoordinated SA species. For Ru in the two epoxidic defects described above this leads to
MO species attached to the surface via van der Waals (vdW) forces. These are then mobile and

agglomerate into larger metal oxide particles. The stability of the Au group is also compromised by Cl
removal. However, in contrast to the Ru group, the formation of MO species is not favorable, thus

leaving the epoxidic defect intact and promoting sintering of the Au group .

(II) Catalyst Preparation
The N-doped carbon support (NC) was prepared in a two-step synthesis, consisting of the oxidative
polymerization of aniline and a subsequent carbonization step.1 Aniline (50 mmol, Acros, 99.5%) was
dissolved in deionized water (40 cm3, pH 0.4; adjusted by hydrochloric acid, 1.25 M, Sigma Aldrich,
>37%), cooled to 277 K, and subsequently added to a precooled solution (277 K) of ammonium persulfate
(50 mmol, Acros, 98%) in deionized water (20 cm3). After 5 min of vigorous stirring, the mixture was
kept at room temperature for 24 h to complete the polymerization process. The formed polyaniline was
thoroughly washed with deionized water for neutralization, dried in vacuum at 393 K for 12 h, and
afterwards calcined at 1073 K (heating rate 5 K min−1, hold time 1 h, static N ). The obtained N-doped

carbon was ground and sieved (particle size 0.4-0.6 mm). Commercial activated carbon (AC, Norit ROX
0.8) was immersed in aqua regia at room temperature to remove metal impurities. After filtration and

thorough washing with deionized water (750 cm3 g−1), the material was dried in static air at 393 K for 12 h
and subsequently ground and sieved into 0.4-0.6 mm particles.
All metal-based catalysts were prepared via an incipient wetness impregnation method with a nominal
metal loading of 1 wt.%. The metal precursors, HAuCl ∙xH O (ABCR, 99.9%, 49.5 wt.% Au),
4 2
RuCl ∙xH O (ABCR, 99.9%, 40.0 wt.% Ru), H PtCl (ABCR, 99.9%, 40.0 wt.% Pt), IrCl ∙xH O (ABCR,
3 2 2 6 3 2
99.9%, 65 wt.% Ir), RhCl ∙xH O (ACROS Organics, 99.9%, 38 wt.% Rh), and PdCl (Sigma Aldrich,
3 2 2
99.9%, 60 wt.% Pd) were dissolved in aqua regia (1.5 cm3 g−1 Au, 5-8 cm3 g−1 for Ru, Ir, Rh), HCl
(1.5 cm3 g−1 for Pd) or water (1.5 cm3 g−1 for Pt) and the obtained solutions were added dropwise, under
magnetic stirring, to the carbon carriers. Subsequently, all samples were dried at 473 K (heating
rate = 5 K min−1, hold time 12 h, static air) to yield the respective single-atom catalysts, denoted as
M-SA/NC or M-SA/AC. In the case of Au, Pt, and Pd, single atoms with four-fold N-coordination (M-
SA-N /NC) were obtained via thermal activation of the respective M-SA/NC samples (T = 1073 K,
4 act
heating rate = 5 K min−1, 16 h, flowing N ). Nanoparticle-based M/C catalysts with varying particle sizes

were derived via thermal activation in the temperature range of T = 523-1073 K (heating
act
rate = 5 K min−1, hold time 12 h, flowing N ). For each metal, a representative nanoparticle-based sample

(M-NP/NC for Ru, Rh, Ir or M-NP/AC for all metals) was selected (i.e., the system with the highest
activity for Ru-, Ir-, Rh-, and Pd-based catalysts and a sample of comparable particle size for Au and Pt-
based catalysts). Catalysts after use in acetylene hydrochlorination for x-h time-on-stream (tos) are labeled
M/C-xh.
(III) Catalyst Characterization
Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was measured using a PANalytical X’Pert PRO-MPD diffractometer
with Cu-K radiation ( = 1.54060 Å). The data was recorded in the 10-70° 2 range with an angular step
size of 0.017° and a counting time of 0.26 s per step. Ar sorption isotherms were measured at 77 K in a
Micromeritics 3Flex instrument, after degassing of the solids at 423 K for 12 h. Scanning transmission
electron micrographs (STEM) with a high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) detector were acquired on
an aberration-corrected HD2700CS (Hitachi) microscope operated at 200 kV. Samples were prepared by

dipping the copper grid supporting a holey carbon foil in a suspension of the solid in ethanol and drying in
air. X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) were acquired on a Physical Electronics Quantum 2000 instrument
using monochromatic Al-K radiation, generated from an electron beam operated at 15 kV, and equipped
with a hemispherical capacitor electron-energy analyzer. The samples were analyzed at an electron take-
off angle of 45° and a constant analyzer pass energy of 46.95 eV with a spectra resolution step width of
0.2 eV. The spectrometer was calibrated for the Au 4f signal at 84.0 ± 0.1 eV. The Au 4f, Pt 4f, Pd 3d,
7/2
Ru 3p, Rh 3d, and Ir 4f spectra were fitted by mixed Gaussian-Lorentzian component profiles after Shirley
background subtraction. The selected peak positions are based on literature reported data. X-ray
absorption fine structure (XAFS) measurements were carried out at the SuperXAS beamline of the Swiss
Light Source.2 The incident photon beam provided by a 2.9 T superbend magnet was selected by a Si
channel-cut Quick-EXAFS monochromator.3 The rejection of higher harmonics and focusing were
achieved with Rh-coated (for Ir-L , Pt-L , Au-L edges) and a Pt-coating (for Pd-K, Ru-K, and Rh-K
3 3 3
edges), respectively, at 2.5 mrad. The beamline was calibrated using the respective metal foils. The area of
sample illuminated by the X-ray beam was 0.5 mm×0.2 mm. All spectra were recorded in transmission
mode at room temperature. The extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra were acquired
with a 1 Hz frequency (0.5 s per spectrum) and then averaged over 10 min. The resulting raw data were
processed using the ProQEXAFS software package.4 The EXAFS spectra were analyzed using the
Demeter software package.5 Volumetric chemisorption of acetylene at 473 K (W = 0.1 g) was performed
cat
in a Micromeritics 3Flex Chemi instrument to quantify the amount of acetylene chemisorbed (V ) at
chem
reaction temperature. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using a Linseis STA PT1600
system coupled to a Pfeiffer Vacuum Thermo-Star GSD 320 T1 mass spectrometer. TGA of the as-
prepared catalysts and after use in acetylene hydrochlorination was carried out in diluted oxygen
(20 vol.% O /Ar, 100 cm3 min−1), heating the samples (amount fixed to 20 mg) from 298 to 1273 K at