DOI: 10.1038/s41929-023-00996-3
Source: main text file
--------------------------------------------------

Methods
Chemicals
Gases (H

and N

) were 5.0 grade supplied by Praxair. Water was purified to a resistivity of 20 MΩ with a Elga Purelab Ultra (Evoqua) system; no additional purification methods were employed. HAuCl

•3H

O (99.7%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. NH

OH (29.3 w/w%) was purchased from Fisher Scientific. Urea (99.5%) was purchased from Acros Organics. Evonik P-25 TiO

was generously supplied by Evonik Industries.

Catalyst preparation
Au/TiO

catalysts were synthesized in a foil-wrapped flask via urea deposition–precipitation

. The desired amount of HAuCl

•3H

O and urea (2.52 g, 0.42 M) were added to 250 ml H

O with stirring. This yellow/orange solution was heated with stirring until the temperature was stable at 80 °C. TiO

powder (6 g) was then added, and the slurry was stirred at 80 °C for 4 h. After 4 h, the stirring was stopped and the solution was allowed to cool to room temperature, resulting in a yellow paste and clear solution. The solid was isolated via vacuum filtration and washed thoroughly with ~100 ml H

O followed by ~100 ml 0.1 M NH

OH, and then H

O until the filtrate was pH 7; the absence of Au and Cl
−
were confirmed with NaBH

and AgNO

tests, respectively. The washed solid was dried at room temperature under vacuum for 16 h and stored at 4 °C under air.
The Au/TiO

catalysts were prepared by heating the supported precursors in flowing 50% v/v H

and N

. The material was loaded into a tube furnace, heated at 5 °C min
−1
to desired temperature (Supplementary 
) and held at the reduction temperature for 1 h, cooled to room temperature and stored at 4 °C under air.
Volumetric H

adsorption
All volumetric adsorption experiments were performed on a Micromeritics ASAP 2020. Previously pre-treated catalysts (that is, previously reduced supported Au precursor) were used for H

adsorption studies. The sample (200–300 mg) was loaded into a U-tube, evacuated at 150 °C for 1 h and then reduced in flowing H

at 150 °C for 1 h to remove any adsorbed oxygen. Following the pre-treatment, the sample was evacuated, purged with helium for 30 min and cooled to the analysis temperature under an active vacuum. A series of two isotherm H

adsorption experiments were performed at 60, 90 and 120 °C; the sample was evacuated to at least 10 μm Hg for 1 h at the adsorption temperature between isotherms.
We note any adsorbed oxygen in the system must be removed before reversible H

adsorption can be observed either via volumetric adsorption or with Fourier-transform infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR) spectroscopy. Once care is taken to remove adsorbed oxygen, the first and the second isotherms are essentially indistinguishable. Therefore, for all further volumetric adsorption measurements described hereafter, reported hydrogen uptakes were determined by averaging the first and second isotherms at each pressure point.
FTIR spectroscopy
IR spectra were collected on a Thermo Nicolet Nexus 470 FTIR spectrometer in a home-built heated (20–300 °C) transmission flow cell. Gas flow rates were controlled using rotameters calibrated with a bubble flowmeter. Water in the feed gases was minimized by passing the reactive gas through a dry ice–isopropanol moisture trap immediately before entering the IR cell. For H

adsorption experiments, ~40–50 mg of catalyst sample was pressed (3 tons of pressure for 10 s) into a 13 mm circular pellet, which was mounted in the flow cell. The sample pellet was pre-treated under 25 standard cubic centimetres per minute (SCCM) of N

at 300 °C for 1 h to eliminate surface carbonates, and then cooled to 50 °C. The vapour pressure of water at −78 °C is 0.5 mTorr (660 ppb). Even with the dry ice–isopropanol bath, sub-ppm levels of residual water from the gas stream adsorb on the surface at lower temperatures. We allowed the surface water coverage to equilibrate until the water bending band at 1,620 cm
−1
was stable before conducting further experiments. On the basis of our previous work and the absorbance of the
δ
HOH
bending vibration, we estimate the surface water coverage to be around 2–3 H

O molecules nm
−2
(
).
After stabilization of the water bending mode, a mixture of 20 SCCM H

and 25 SCCM N

was flowed over the catalyst at 50 °C for 1 h to ensure no weakly adsorbed O

remained on the pellet. Catalysts were kept under N

flow to ensure the weakly adsorbed H

is removed. H

adsorption experiments were then performed at desired temperatures by flowing the desired ratio of H

and N

over the catalyst.
Transmission electron microscopy
Gold particle sizes were determined with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Catalysts were imaged with scanning/transmission electron microscopy using an FEI Talos F200X microscope at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. A small quantity of each sample was crushed in an agate mortar and dispersed in ethanol with sonication. A few drops of this suspension were placed on a Cu TEM grid (Ted Pella) and allowed to dry before inserting into the microscope for analysis. The number-averaged diameter for Au nanoparticles was determined with ImageJ from the measurement of >200 particles (Supplementary 
). Supplementary 
compiles TEM, and BET characterization data for the catalysts studied in this work. Error bars associated with the diameter represent the standard deviation of the distribution.
Data availability
Raw data are available through ScholarSphere, Penn State’s open access repository at
https://scholarsphere.psu.edu/
or available from the authors upon reasonable request. The atomic coordinates of the models in DFT calculations of charge density difference and spin density are provided in Supplementary Data

.