synthesis of denser ADNSCs using the old or traditional ion impregnation methods is limited; low concentrations of precursors in the chemical impregnation enable us to make a single atom or few clusters of the catalyst. However, the catalyst is sparse. By increasing the precursor concentrations, it will be denser but large NPs will form. One solution to this problem would be to pulverize the supports and the catalyst metals that are supposed to be on their surface to the nanoscale
46
. There should be numerous opportunities to design the supports as well as the loaded metal catalysts, but we emphasize that the supports and catalysts should be easy to manufacture and definitely be safe for handling by a worker who would prepare the catalytic layer. Moreover, such nanoscale catalysts should never be released to the environment during its lifetime. Finding a way to create highly dense ADNSCs will be a new frontier for practical catalysis. Resistance to fluctuations in temperature, CO and sulfur poisoning and constant mechanical jolting are other crucial parameters for catalysts that would be applied in the automotive industry.
Steam reforming and other related methods involving water are simple, and treatments with low material or environmental costs have been shown to significantly improve the performance of the catalysts
42
,
44
,
60
,
61
,
79
. The detection of light atoms, such as H and O, will be the next great challenge in understanding the role of these species on catalysis, which is still difficult to determine using even state-of-art STEM and EXAFS measurements. However, there is no doubt that direct observation of such light elements would greatly advance our understanding of catalysis. Nuclear reaction analysis
103
, NMR, and advanced neutron diffraction techniques would play important roles in this regard.
The catalyst is usually visualized as remaining unchanged, in terms of its morphology, during the reaction; however, this would not be always true for nanocatalysts, as large-scale simulations of molecular dynamics and microkinetics modelling demonstrated
104
. They showed an interesting picture of the reaction of an Au
20
nanocluster on TiO
2
(110), in which an atom moves only a short distance from the cluster, captures CO for oxidation, and moves back to the cluster. Such detailed observations are currently limited to theoretical calculation and thus, a breakthrough in operand technique to visualize catalysis remains an issue for future analysis (Fig.
1
).
Single atoms and few-atom clusters are currently characterized by TEM and/or STM images and EXAFS to confirm the absence of metal–metal bonds. Since metal oxide supports are non-conductive, their STM observation needs a conductive material layer to be placed underneath the sample
105
. Applying advanced atomic force microscope (AFM) direct imaging to identify such single-atom or few-atom clusters seems promising
106
,
107
.
The intensity of the white line in X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and XPS spectra are often used to discuss the chemical states of nanocatalysts, but there are well-known final state effects that cause inherent size-dependent binding energy shifts to higher binding energy in XPS. Similar changes are seen in XANES analysis
108
. XANES, XPS and FTIR are complementary and indirect methods to determine the chemical states; hence, DFT-based Bader charge analysis is employed to calculate the atomic charges, as seen in Table
1
. Determining the real atomic charge of nanocatalysts experimentally remains a challenging task to date.
The study of catalysts is reaching the cooperative stage at which it is not only the metal atoms deposited on supports that play a role as an active site; the supports themselves also play an important and collaborative role in catalysis. To design a good ADNSC, choosing a material that has a low Δ
E
VO
(or reducible or modified non-reducible oxides) would be a good starting point because it would stabilize the atom-scale catalysts on their surface.
The challenge and opportunities lie in the exploration of methods that enable a high dispersity of such single atom or few-atom clusters with high density. Single-atom-layer catalysis will be the ultimate limit, and we are curious to know the extent of its density and the optimal coverage for CO oxidation because these factors will govern the reaction path. Thus far, there appears to be no such method of preparing a laterally large two-dimensional catalyst layer, in which a monolayer of metal cations partly or entirely cover the surface of the oxide support, without stacking a second layer. Wet chemistry has played an important role in the development of practical automotive catalysts for long time, although we may have to consider other industrially established and more artificially controllable deposition techniques, such as physical and chemical vapor deposition methods that are often employed for thin film fabrication with atomic-level accuracy. There will be many useful feedbacks as techniques of such two-dimensional, dense, mass-efficient single-atom-layer catalysis are established and will be linked to future automotive applications of ADNSCs.